The Bible identifies a second source
of help that Jehovah has given us
so that we can experience
the joy of making disciples.
That gift is described at 1 Peter 5:9.
Please read that with me
—1 Peter 5:9:
“But take your stand
against him, firm in the faith,
“knowing that the same kind
of sufferings are being experienced
“by the entire association
of your brothers
in the world.”
What hope has Jehovah given us?
It’s our worldwide association
of brothers and sisters.
Just as their example can help us to endure,
our brothers can also help us
meet the challenges in the ministry.
Yes, Jehovah has given us
a large spiritual family,
and that shows that he wants us
to experience the joy of working together.
Now we might be thinking,
‘That’s encouraging, but is it realistic
to think that I can experience the joy
of making a disciple?’
Perhaps you’ve had Bible studies
but none of them have yet progressed
to the point of dedication and baptism.
So you might wonder,
‘Am I really up to that challenge?’
Or maybe you’re a parent
who’s newer in the truth,
and you’re thinking to yourself,
‘How can I reach my child’s heart
and help him or her learn
to love Jehovah as I do?’
Or maybe you’re dealing with poor health
or the effects of old age, and you wonder,
‘Can I have an effective ministry?’
Brothers and sisters,
we want you to take heart.
Jehovah has provided help,
and help may be nearer than you think.
To highlight the help
that Jehovah gives to all of us,
for a few moments,
let’s consider the apostle Paul’s experience.
When we think of the apostle Paul,
what comes to mind?
Perhaps a very hardworking, energetic brother
who traveled extensively as a missionary.
And can there be any doubt
that Paul’s ministry was a complete success?
But was Paul’s success
the result of his efforts alone?
No.
Paul needed
and humbly accepted help from others.
For example, you may recall reading
in Acts chapters 16 and 17,
how the man Silas traveled with Paul.
On that trip, in the city of Philippi,
Paul and Silas shared the joy
of helping an entire family
become baptized disciples.
Now, there’s something very interesting
in the Bible’s record of that account:
Every time Paul is mentioned,
Silas is mentioned as well.
In fact, the expression “Paul and Silas”
occurs six times in quick succession.
Well, what do we learn from that?
Clearly, Paul had help in his ministry.
He did not go it alone.
Now, young ones, a question for you:
Can you think of another close friend of Paul
who often traveled with him?
You got it right, Timothy.
For about 14 years, the two of them
worked together in Jehovah’s service.
Now, did Paul, the more experienced man,
really view Timothy as a helper,
as someone who could assist him?
Yes, he did.
As Paul neared the end
of his life, for example,
he wrote to Timothy, his younger friend,
and said: “Do your utmost
to come to me shortly.”
Paul was not too proud to ask for help.
In Acts chapter 18,
the Bible tells us about a married couple
(Aquila and his wife, Priscilla, or Prisca)
who supported Paul.
In the city of Corinth,
they welcomed Paul not only into their home
but also into the business of making tents.
Now, can you imagine
how much joy these three must have had
as they worked together
not only in the secular trade of making tents
but also in advancing
the Kingdom good news?
Now, when Paul left Corinth,
do you know what happened
with Aquila and Priscilla?
They followed him to Ephesus.
There, Aquila and Priscilla used their home
as a meeting place
for the local congregation.
Their helpful services continued.
At Acts 18:24,
we learned that this couple
became acquainted with Apollos
—a Christian from Egypt who,
according to the Scriptural account,
was an “eloquent man”
and “well-versed in the Scriptures.”
Even so, Apollos needed some help
because he had some gaps
in his understanding.
So, what did helpful Priscilla and Aquila do?
Acts 18:26 tells us:
“They took [Apollos] into their company
and explained the way
of God more accurately to him.”
Now think of that for a moment.
This humble couple, tentmakers,
were not intimidated by Apollos.
To them, he was a brother
—a part of the family.
And out of brotherly love,
they took the initiative
to give him the help that he needed.
Well, in thinking about Paul
and how he viewed those that assisted him,
how do you think he felt
about this beautiful couple?
Please open your Bible with me
to Paul’s own words that Jehovah preserved
at Romans 16:3, 4.
That’s Romans 16:3, 4;
let’s read it together:
“Give my greetings
to Prisca [or, Priscilla] and Aquila,
“my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,
“who have risked their own necks for me
and to whom not only I
but also all the congregations
of the nations give thanks.”
Deep appreciation
is what Paul felt for this loyal couple.
He viewed them as his fellow workers.
Now, what does all of what we’ve discussed
tell us about the apostle Paul?
Clearly, the success
he enjoyed in his ministry
was not the result of his efforts alone.
Jehovah gave Paul the help he needed
to have an effective ministry,
and that help came in the form
of many brothers and sisters.
Dear brothers and sisters,
Jehovah has given you and given me
the same help—our brothers.
In the following dramatization,
please notice how Neeta benefits
from the help of another sister.
I’ve tried everything
to get Jade to a meeting . . .
It’s every Thursday and Sunday,
and I think
—I think you’d really enjoy it.
I can’t promise anything.
It would be nice if you could come.
I might just text her,
actually, just to remind her.
OK, yeah, excellent.
Have you tried bringing
other people on the study?
. . . well, maybe not everything.
What are you doing
tomorrow afternoon?
Hi.
This is Abigay.
Oh.
Hi, Abigay.
Sorry, let me kill that.
It’s been a long time since I hear them!
You know that band?
Know them?
I used to see them all the time
before I became a Witness.
No way!
You like that kind of music?
You don’t believe me?
Oh, this bag, it’s so big!
I can’t find anything.
Abigay?
Ah, when I was young . . .
You were in a band?
“The sun shines so sweet.”
Ah, I love that song!
I actually have that vinyl.
So I’ll be gone next week.
OK.
But I’ll have someone else
take care of the study, OK?
Did you notice how Neeta responded
to the suggestion that was given her?
Applying that counsel brought good results.
Like Neeta, we may need specific help
to accomplish our ministry fully.
For example, when it comes
to making return visits
and conducting Bible studies,
could some brothers and sisters
in your congregation
help you to improve your skills?
Likely, all of us would benefit
by reaching out to such publishers
who have gained experience
and skill in those aspects of the ministry.
What if you’re a parent
who wants to instill love for Jehovah
in the heart of your child?
How about asking some other parents
or grandparents for advice?
If they’ve had success raising their children
to love Jehovah
and become baptized disciples,
they will certainly be happy
to share their experience with you.
And what if we have
age limitations or health concerns,
we may need practical assistance
that accommodates our needs.
For example, at many Bethel homes,
elderly and infirm brothers and sisters
are still having a regular
and productive share in the ministry.
Do you know how?
Elders at Bethel
arrange for younger publishers
to join the elderly ones
in letter writing and phone witnessing.
One sister by the name of Nancy,
who was nearly 90 years old
at the time, said this:
“I don’t view letter writing
as just stuffing envelopes.
“This is field service.
People need to know the truth!”
How encouraging!
And did you know that in less than a year,
one group of precious older ones
devoted over 1,000 hours to the ministry,
wrote over 6,000 letters,
made over 2,000 phone calls,
and placed over 6,000 pieces of literature?
What good was accomplished
by working together,
and what joy they experienced!
Of course, we have to admit
that it takes humility
to acknowledge that we need help.
But in this, we can learn from Apollos.
Though eloquent
and though well-versed in the Scriptures,
he accepted the help that he needed.
As a result, he benefited
and all those that he would teach
thereafter benefited.
So here’s the point:
Can you think of someone
like Priscilla or Aquila
who could give you the help you need?
If so, why not explain your needs
and ask that person
to join you in the ministry
or on Bible studies.
Now, if you’ve been serving
Jehovah for a time,
are you in a position to help others?
If so, we encourage you to be observant
and take the initiative to offer assistance.
If you see that a brother
or sister would benefit
from a kind suggestion, don’t hold back.
At an appropriate time,
you might begin the conversation
in a friendly way by saying:
‘May I offer you a suggestion?’
or ‘Here’s what I try to do.’
Remember, if we’re kind
and thoughtful like Aquila and Priscilla,
likely our words and example
will prove to be a blessing
to help our brothers find joy
in making disciples too.
Well, in the second part of this symposium,
what have we learned?
First, our brothers are a gift from Jehovah
to help us make disciples.
And second, when we
work together and support one another,
all of us can find
great joy in our precious ministry.
Now Brother Gerrit Lösch,
a member of the Governing Body,
will consider the third
and final talk of this symposium,
“Experience the Joy of Disciple-Making—
Accept Jehovah’s Help—Prayer.”